Hotel Booking Demand & Cancellation Prediction

Overview
This project focuses on analyzing hotel booking data to understand key trends, customer behavior, and factors leading to cancellations. A machine learning model is developed to predict whether a booking will be canceled or not, and an interactive Streamlit app is built to allow real-time predictions based on user inputs.

Objectives
Perform comprehensive data analysis to identify booking trends and customer patterns.
Handle missing values, outliers, and feature engineering for better model accuracy.
Train and fine-tune a machine learning model to predict booking cancellations.
Build an interactive Streamlit web app for real-time predictions.

Dataset
The dataset used is a hotel booking dataset containing various attributes such as:
Booking details (lead time, number of nights, ADR, etc.)
Customer details (adults, children, repeat guests, etc.)
Hotel details (type of hotel, deposit type, meal, etc.)
Cancellations and special requests

Key Steps
1. Data Analysis & Cleaning
Handled missing values and removed duplicates.
Performed outlier detection and capping for skewed features.
Converted categorical variables using Label Encoding.
Generated insights through visualizations such as booking trends, cancellation ratios, and correlations.

2. Feature Engineering

Created new variables such as:
high_canceller – to flag frequent cancellers.
high_request – based on number of special requests.
last_minute – to mark late bookings.
Standardized and optimized features for model training.

3. Model Development

Implemented multiple ML algorithms and selected Random Forest Classifier as the best performer.
Fine-tuned using GridSearchCV for optimal hyperparameters.
Evaluated using metrics:
Accuracy: 83.61%
Precision: 78.10%
Recall: 75.74%
F1 Score: 76.90%
ROC-AUC: 90.76%

4. Visualization & Insights

Visualized feature importances to identify key drivers of cancellations.
Used alternative interpretability methods for model explainability instead of SHAP due to high runtime.

5. Streamlit Web Application

Developed an interactive Streamlit dashboard for predictions.
The user can input booking details, and the model returns a real-time cancellation prediction.
The app integrates the fine-tuned Random Forest model.

Files in Repository
hotel_booking_analysis.ipynb	Complete data analysis and visualization
model_training.ipynb	Model building, tuning, and evaluation
best_random_forest_model.pkl	Saved ML model
app.py	Streamlit application script
requirements.txt	Python dependencies
README.md	Project documentation

How to Run the Project
Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/palak-verma-0309/Hotel-Booking.git
cd hotel-booking-prediction

Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

Run Streamlit app
streamlit run app.py

Results & Insights
The model achieved strong performance with balanced precision and recall.
Lead time, number of special requests, and customer type were major predictors of cancellation.
Clear behavioral trends were identified — e.g., long lead times and deposit type strongly correlate with cancellations.